*
PEOPLE LIKE TO LOOK AT
THE INSTANT GEOLOGY,
THE VOLCANOES GOING
UP AND SPEWING ASH.
WE'RE BUILDING MOUNTAINS
AND ERODING THEM
AND MAKING DEEP BASINS.
THIS IS WHERE ALL
THE ACTION HAPPENS.
THE EARTH IS A VERY
DYNAMIC STRUCTURE,
CONSTANTLY UNDERGOING
PROCESSES OF CHANGE.
GEOLOGISTS HAVE SEARCHED
THE GLOBE FOR CLUES
TO BETTER UNDERSTAND THE
PROCESSES THAT DIRECTLY
OR INDIRECTLY RESULT
IN SOME OF THE MOST
SPECTACULAR SCENERY
AROUND THE WORLD.
THE SCIENCE AS WE DEFINE
IT NOW AS REALLY BEEN
THROUGH A BIG REVOLUTION
WOULD BE DEVELOPMENT OF
THE PLATE TECTONIC
THEORY THAT EXPLAINS,
TO FIRST ORDER, HOW
THINGS LIKE EARTHQUAKES
AND VOANOES AND
MOUNTAIN-BUILDING ALL OCCUR.
PLATE TECTONICS IS THE
THEORY THAT EARTH'S
OUTER LAYER IS MADE UP OF
PLATES WHICH HAVE MOVED
THROUGHOUT
EARTH'S HISTORY.
TECTONICS COMES FROM
THE GREEK WORD FOR
"ONE WHO CONSTRUCTS".
PLATE TECTONICS AND THE
MOVEMENT OF THE PLATES
ON THE SURFACE OF THE
EARTH IS RESPONSIBLE FOR
THE NOW RECOGNIZABLE
SHAPES THAT WE
ASSOCIATE WITH
THE CONTINENTS
AND WITH CERTAIN
AREAS OF THE PLANET.
OF COURSE THEY WEREN'T ALWAYS
IN THIS CONFIGURATION.
WAY BACK WHEN WHEN
THERE WAS PANGEA -
YOU KNOW, THERE WAS
ONE UNIFIED LAND MASS.
ABOUT 250 MILLION YEARS
AGO OUR EARTH HAD
ONE SINGLE GIANT LAND
MASS CALLED PANGEA,
MEANING ALL LANDS, AND
THIS SUPER CONTINENT
BROKE UP TO CREATE THE
MODERN DAY CONTINENTS.
THIS THEORY CALLED
"CONTINENTAL DRIFT"
IS THE FORERUNNER
TO PLATE TECTONICS.
A VERY ASTUTE SCIENTIST, A
METEOROLOGIST BY THE NAME
OF ALFRED WEGENER, ROUGHLY
BACK ABOUT 1915 OR SO,
WAS REALLY THE FIRST GUY
TO PUT IT ALL TOGETHER
AND WHAT HE FOUND WAS A
LOT OF VERY COMPELLING
CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE
THAT SUGGESTED THAT
THE CONTINENTS HAD
ONE TIME BEEN JOINED
AND THEY SINCE
HAD DRIFTED APART.
HENCE THE TERM
"CONTINENTAL DRIFT".
AND HE FOUND FOUR VERY
COMPELLING LINES OF EVIDENCE.
HE FOUND THAT THE CONTINENTS
SHARED COMMON COASTLINES.
MUCH LIKE A PUZZLE YOU
COULD PUT THESE THINGS
BACK TOGETHER.
AND THEN THERE WERE MANY
DETAILS OF THOSE CONTINENTS
THAT WERE KNOWN
A HUNDRED YEARS AGO,
IN THE EARLY 1900'S THAT
SUPPORTED THAT IDEA
OF THE FIT OF
THE CONTINENTS.
THERE WERE FOSSILS THAT
WERE FOUND, FOR INSTANCE,
IN AFRICA AND SOUTH
AMERICA THAT WERE
FROM EARLY REPTILES
THAT COULD NOT HAVE
SWUM ACROSS THE
ATLANTIC OCEAN.
THERE WERE OLD MOUNTAIN
BELTS THAT ARE NO LONGER
MOUNTAINS, THEY'VE
BEEN ERODED DOWN,
BUT WE SEE THE ROOTS OF
THEM IN SOUTH AMERICA.
WE SEE THE ROOTS OF
DIFFERENT MOUNTAINS
IN NORTH AMERICA AND THOSE
MOUNTAINS PRESUMABLY
JUST GO OUT TO SEA,
BUT IN FACT
A MATCH FOR THOSE
MOUNTAINS IS FOUND
ON THE OTHER SIDE
OF THE ATLANTIC.
ALONG WITH FOSSILS OF
PLANTS AND ANIMALS AND THE
MOUNTAIN RANGES, WEGENER
FOUND OTHER EVIDENCE OF
SIMILAR GEOLOGICAL FEATURES
ON SEPARATED CONTINENTS
SUCH AS DEPOSITS
OF ICE AND COAL.
THE PRESENCE OF GLACIAL
DEPOSITS AND COAL DEPOSITS
AS THEY STAND NOW ARE
VERY DIFFICULT TO EXPLAIN,
BUT IF YOU REASSEMBLE THE
CONTINENTS INTO THIS BIG
LAND MASS THAT HE CALLED
"PANGEA", ALL OF A SUDDEN
THESE VERY MYSTERIOUS
GLACIAL DEPOSITS MAKE SENSE.
DESPITE ALL THE EVIDENCE,
MANY SCIENTISTS
DURING WEGENER'S TIME
REJECTED THIS THEORY.
MOSTLY BECAUSE THEY COULD
NOT THINK OF ANY MECHANISM
WHEREBY THE CONTINENTS COULD
DRIFT AWAY FROM ONE ANOTHER.
NOBODY COULD SEE HOW
THEY COULD PLOW THROUGH
THE OCEAN BASINS.
AND SO BECAUSE NOBODY
COULD UNDERSTAND HOW
THAT COULD HAPPEN, THEY
THOUGHT HE WAS CRAZY.
BUT IT DIDN'T
DIE COMPLETELY.
IT WASN'T UNTIL
TECHNOLOGIES DEVELOPED
DURING WWII THAT
ALLOWED PEOPLE
TO IMAGE THE
OCEAN BOTTOM AND
OUR UNDERSTANDING OF
EARTH'S MAGNETIC FIELD
DID THIS NOTION OF
CONTINENTAL DRIFT RESURFACE.
WHEN SUBMARINES WERE GOING
BACK AND FORTH ACROSS THE
OCEAN BASINS TRAILING
MAGNETOMETERS AS THEY WERE
LOOKING FOR ENEMY
SUBMARINES, THEY STARTED
TO NOTICE A PATTERN
OF MAGNETIC STRIPES
ON THE OCEAN FLOOR AND
THEY COULD ARGUE THAT
THE ROCKS ON THE SEA FLOOR
MUST HAVE CRYSTALLIZED
AT DIFFERENT POINTS
IN TIME BECAUSE
SOME OF THE LITTLE
MAGNETIC MINERALS IN THEM
WERE LINED UP POINTING TO
THE PRESENT DAY NORTH POLE
AND THEN YOU'D MOVE
SOME KILOMETERS AWAY
AND YOU'D GO ACROSS A BAND
OF ROCKS WHERE ALL THE
MAGNETIC MINERALS WERE
POINTING TO THE SOUTH POLE.
WE KNOW NOW TODAY THAT
THESE STRIPED PATTERNS
REPRESENT WHAT ARE CALLED
"MAGNETIC REVERSALS".
ODDLY ENOUGH, THE EARTH
REVERSES ITS POLARITY.
THAT IS, THE NORTH POLE
BECOMES THE SOUTH POLE
AND VICE VERSA
AND IT HAS DONE SO
RANDOMLY THROUGHOUT
EARTH'S GEOLOGIC PAST.
WE DON'T REALLY UNDERSTAND
WHY THIS HAPPENS,
WE JUST KNOW
THAT IT DOES.
IT'S BEEN WELL DOCUMENTED
IN ROCKS THROUGHOUT
THE GLOBE AND ROCKS
ON THE OCEAN BOTTOM.
SO THESE MAGNETIC
STRIPES THAT WE SEE ARE
REPRESENTATIVE OF EARTH'S
CHANGING MAGNETIC FIELD -
THIS FLIPPING OF EARTH'S
MAGNETIC POLARITY.
A BONUS TO THIS IS THAT
THE STRIPES ALSO WERE
PROOF POSITIVE OF
SEA FLOOR SPREADING.
SEA FLOOR SPREADING IS
WHEN TWO PLATES MOVE AWAY
FROM EACH OTHER AND ALLOW
MAGMA TO RISE FROM
THE EARTH'S INTERIOR TO
CREATE NEW OCEAN FLOOR.
AS THE MAGMA COOLS,
THE MAGNETIC MINERALS
CRYSTALLIZE WITHIN THE
ROCK AND ALIGN TO THE
EARTH'S MAGNETIC FIELD.
THIS WAS THE
MISSING PIECE.
AND THEN PEOPLE WERE ABLE
TO SAY WELL, MAYBE NEW
OCEANIC CRUST, NEW SEA
FLOOR IS BEING PRODUCED
IN THE CENTER OF THE OCEAN
AND MOVING AWAY FROM
THE CENTRAL PORTION AND
RECORDING THE EARTH'S
MAGNETIC FIELD AS IT
CRYSTALLIZES AND MOVES.
AND IF THE OCEAN FLOOR IS
MOVING, MAYBE THE CONTINENTS
ARE ATTACHED TO THAT AND
THEY'RE MOVING AS WELL.
SO IT WAS CONTINENTAL DRIFT
PLUS SEA FLOOR SPREADING
THAT GAVE RISE
TO THE MODERN THEORY
OF PLATE TECTONICS.
EARTH'S CRUST IS DIVIDED
INTO SEVERAL SEPARATE
SOLID PLATES THAT FLOAT
AROUND INDEPENDENTLY
ON TOP OF THE HOT
MANTLE BELOW.
IF WE LOOK AT THE EARTH,
WE CAN LOOK AT IT...
LET'S CALL IT THE
ANATOMY OF THE EARTH.
WE CAN LOOK AT IT IN
TWO DIFFERENT WAYS.
WE CAN LOOK AT THE
COMPOSITIONAL LAYERS
OF THE EARTH WHICH INCLUDE
THE CRUST, THE MANTLE,
AND THE CORE.
THEN WE CAN LOOK AT
THE MECHANICAL LAYERS
OF THE EARTH AND,
BY MECHANICAL I MEAN
HOW STRONG
THAT MATERIAL IS.
AN EXAMPLE I LIKE TO
USE IS A WAX CANDLE
AT ROOM TEMPERATURE IS
BRITTLE AND PRETTY STRONG.
IT TAKES A LITTLE BIT
OF FORCE TO SNAP IT.
BUT IF YOU HEAT A CANDLE
UP IT BECOMES MUSHY
AND SOFT AND IS NOT
PARTICULARLY STRONG.
IT BECOMES WEAK, RIGHT?
IF WE LOOK AT EARTH'S
STRUCTURE, ITS ANATOMY,
BASED ON THE MECHANICAL
STRENGTH OF EARTH'S
INTERNAL AREA, THIS
IS WHAT WE FIND:
WE FIND THAT THE CRUST
IN THE UPPER PART
OF THE MANTLE FORM
A RIGID OUTER SHELL
THAT WE CALL
A LITHOSPHERE.
IT'S ABOUT 100
KILOMETERS THICK.
BENEATH THAT WE HAVE A
MUSHY LAYER, A WEAK LAYER,
THAT IS MADE OF PARTIALLY
MOLTEN MANTLE MATERIAL
CALLED THE ASTHENOSPHERE.
THESE TWO LAYERS ARE
THE MOST IMPORTANT
IN THE MECHANICS OF
PLATE TECTONICS,
SO THE TWO MOST IMPORTANT
PLAYERS IN THIS STORY.
THE LITHOSPHERE, THIS
RIGID OUTER SHELL,
ALMOST FLOATS, IF YOU WILL,
ON THE ASTHENOSPHERE
AND SLIDES ABOUT
THE ASTHENOSPHERE.
THE LITHOSPHERE IS WHAT
MAKES UP THE PLATES
OF PLATE TECTONICS.
IF WE BREAK THE LITHOSPHERE
UP INTO DIFFERENT PLATES,
THOSE PLATES WILL THEN SLIDE
ABOUT ON THIS ASTHENOSPHERE
AND INTERACT IN A
VARIETY OF WAYS.
THEY'LL BUMP INTO EACH
OTHER, THEY'LL MOVE AWAY
FROM EACH OTHER, AND
THEY'LL SLIDE SIDE BY SIDE.
AND PEOPLE ARGUE ABOUT
WHICH ARE THE MAJOR PLATES,
BUT THERE'S SOMEWHERE BETWEEN
8, 10, 12 MAJOR PLATES
AND THEN A NUMBER
OF SMALLER PIECES -
WHAT WE MIGHT
CALL MICROPLATES.
AND PLACES WHERE A BIG STABLE
PLATE IS IN THE PROCESS
OF TRYING TO BREAK UP AND
MAKE A NEW MICROPLATE.
SOME OF THE MAJOR
PLATES ARE:
THERE ARE ALSO SEVERAL
OTHER SMALLER PLATES,
AND EVEN MICROPLATES
THAT TOGETHER WITH
THE MAJOR PLATES ARE
IN CONSTANT MOTION
AND CONTINUALLY CHANGING
IN SHAPE AND SIZE.
PLATES EDGES MAY CONTAIN
EITHER OCEANIC CRUST
OR CONTINENTAL CRUST BUT
DON'T QUITE MATCH UP
TO THE CONTINENTS
AND OCEANS.
IF WE THEN LOOK AT A PLATE
OF PLATE TECTONICS
WE'LL NOTICE THAT THIS
PLATE IS OFTEN COMPOSED OF
BOTH CONTINENTAL
AND OCEANIC CRUSTS.
AN ANALOGY THAT'S HELPFUL
IS TO THINK OF A PIECE
OF BREAD THAT ACTS
AS THE UPPER MANTLE
AND THEN SPREADING SOME
PEANUT BUTTER ON ONE SIDE
AND SOME JELLY
ON THE OTHER.
MAYBE THE JELLY'S
THE OCEANIC CRUST,
THE PEANUT BUTTER'S
THE CONTINENTAL CRUST.
BOTH OF THOSE CRUST TYPES
ARE RIDING ON THE BREAD.
SO, COLLECTIVELY THAT'LL
MAKE UP AN ENTIRE PLATE.
MANY FORCES CAUSE THE
SURFACE OF THE EARTH
TO CHANGE OVER TIME.
HOWEVER, THE LARGEST
FORCE THAT CHANGES
OUR PLANET'S SURFACE
IS PLATE TECTONICS
AND THE MOVEMENT OF THE
EARTH'S OUTER LAYER.
IT IS THIS ONGOING PROCESS
THAT CAUSES MOUNTAINS
TO PUSH HIGHER AND
OCEANS TO GROW WIDER.
WE HAVE THIS ALMOST
STILL FRAME OF THE EARTH
AS IT IS NOW BECAUSE WE'RE
LIVING IN A MILLISECOND
OF GEOLOGIC TIME SO WE
HAVE SEARED INTO OUR MINDS
WHAT THE EARTH
LOOKS LIKE BUT
WE FORGET THAT THE
PLATES ARE STILL MOVING
AND IT'S NOT ALWAYS
GOING TO LOOK LIKE THIS.
THE WHOLE EARTH IS
A DYNAMIC SYSTEM.
THE REASON WE HAVE
EARTHQUAKES AND VOLCANOES
IS REALLY BECAUSE
THE EARTH'S PLATES
ARE STILL
MOVING AROUND.
THE ATLANTIC OCEAN IS
STILL GETTING BIGGER AND,
TECHNICALLY, THE PACIFIC
IS STILL GETTING SMALLER.
NOW, CAN YOU
MEASURE THAT?
IT'S LIKE YOU'RE LOOKING
AT AUT ONE CENTIMETER
A YEAR OF CHANGE.
WE LIKE TO SAY IN GEOLOGY
THIS IS ABOUT AS FAST AS
YOUR FINGERNAILS GROW.
IT'S A VERY SLOW RATE
BUT IT'S A HUGE MASS
OF THE EARTH'S CRUST THAT'S
MOVING THAT WAY AND SO
IT'S A VERY LARGE FORCE
MOVING ACROSS THE EARTH.
WE CAN MEASURE MOVEMENT OF
THE PLATES IN MANY WAYS.
WE CAN USE THE RECORD
OF THE MAGNETIC STRIPES
IN SEA FLOOR SPREADING,
BUT MOST OBVIOUSLY WE CAN
MEASURE THEIR MOTIONS
DIRECTLY THANKS TO GPS,
THE GLOBAL
POSITIONING SYSTEM.
THE GLOBAL POSITIONING
SYSTEM WHICH IS
BASED ON A SERIES OF
SATELLITES THAT ARE
POSITIONED IN
STATIC ORBIT.
THEY GIVE PRECISE
LOCATIONS FOR YOUR LITTLE
HANDHELD GPS UNITS -
THE GPS IN YOUR CARS,
THE GPS ON AIRLINES.
IF SOMEONE HAS A GPS UNIT,
YOU CAN USE THAT UNIT AND
THE OVERHEAD SATELLITES
TO PINPOINT YOUR LOCATION
ON PLANET EARTH.
IF YOU HAVE A GPS
UNIT ON ONE CONTINENT
AND YOU HAVE A GPS UNIT
ON ANOTHER CONTINENT
AND YOU'RE KEEPING TRACK
OF THEIR POSITION,
YOU CAN SEE IN REAL TIME
- ALTHOUGH SLOWLY -
YOU CAN SEE IN
REAL TIME HOW
THOSE COINENTS
ARE MOVING AROUND.
SO WE CAN ACTUALLY RECORD
THE CONTINENT'S LOCATIONS
DAY BY DAY AND YEAR BY
YEAR AND IT SHOWS THAT
THE CONTINENTS
ARE INDEED MOVING.
WHAT'S STILL A QUESTION
IS THE EXACT MECHANICS
BEHIND PLATE TECTONICS.
A LOT OF REALLY
GREAT IDEAS,
SOME GREAT HYPOTHESES
THAT ARE OUT THERE,
BUT WE STILL DON'T
KNOW CONCLUSIVELY
WHAT DRIVES THE PLATES.
SOME OF THE FORCES THAT
ARE INVOLVED IN CREATING
THINGS LIKE VOLCANOES AND
EARTHQUAKES AND THE BIG
DISASTROUS THINGS
EVERYBODY ASSOCIATES
WITH GEOLOGY COME FROM
VERY DEEP INSIDE THE EARTH
WHERE IT'S MUCH, MUCH
HOTTER THAN IT IS AT THE
SURFACE OF THE EARTH AND
IT CAUSES THE INTERIOR
OF THE EARTH, EVEN THOUGH
IT'S MADE OF SOLID ROCK,
IT'S HOT ENOUGH
THAT IT'S
VERY SQUISHY AND GOOEY
AND IT'S ABLE TO FLOW
IN RESPONSE TO THAT
TEMPERATURE GRADIENT.
THIS IS CALLED
"CONVECTION" AND MANY
PEOPLE THINK IT'S THAT
CONVECTION IN THE INTERIOR
OF THE EARTH THAT DRIVES
MOVEMENT OF THE EARTH'S
TECTONIC PLATES AND IT'S
THE INTERACTIONS OF THOSE
PLATES WITH ONE ANOTHER,
SLAMMING INTO EACH OTHER
AND GRINDING
PAST EACH OTHER,
THAT CAUSES EARTHQUAKES,
BUILDS LARGE MOUNTAINS,
CREATES THE OCEAN BASINS,
MAKES VOLCANOES ERUPT,
AND SO ON.
THE HUGE MAJESTIC
MOUNTAINS OF THE WORLD
ARE BECAUSE
OF MOVING PLATES.
WHEN TWO SECTIONS OF THE
EARTH'S LITHOSPHERE COLLIDE,
THE SLABS PILE
INTO ONE ANOTHER
CAUSING "DEFORMATION"
OR FOLDING OF THE SLABS.
THE HIMALAYAS ARE THE
RESULT OF INDIA SLAMMING UP
INTO WHAT WAS JUST THE
ASIAN PLATE AT THE TIME.
IT'S HARD TO BELIEVE BUT
THOSE DRAMATIC STRUCTURES
REALLY ARE FORMED
VERY SLOWLY.
THEY SEEM LIKE THEY
WERE THE RESULT OF
A CATASTROPHIC COLLISION,
BUT THESE ARE THINGS
THAT HAPPEN
CENTIMETERS A YEAR.
THE FACT THAT THE EARTH'S
CONTINENTS ARE NOT FIXED
IN PLACE BUT RATHER FLOAT
ON A SEA OF MOLTEN ROCK
MEANS THAT THEY MOVE
AROUND QUITE A BIT.
THIS IS WHERE ALL
THE ACTION HAPPENS.
THIS IS WHERE WE BUILD
MOUNTAINS, WE CREATE
VOLCANOES, AND WE HAVE
NUMEROUS EARTHQUAKES.
BECAUSE THE TECTONIC
PLATES ARE ALWAYS MOVING
THEY END UP WITH DIFFERENT
POSITIONS WITH RESPECT TO
ONE ANOTHER AND DIFFERENT
KINDS OF BOUNDARIES.
THERE ARE THREE MAJOR
TYPES OF PLATE BOUNDARIES:
DIVERGENT BOUNDARIES OCCUR
WHEN PLATES DIVIDE AND
PULL AWAY FROM EACH OTHER
AND NEW CRUST IS CREATED
LIKE IN SEA
FLOOR SPREADING.
CONVERGENT BOUNDARIES
OCCUR WHEN THE CRUST
IS DESTROYED AS ONE PLATE
DIVES UNDER ANOTHER
IN A PROCESS KNOWN
AS SUBDUCTION.
IN THIS PROCESS THE CRUST
IS OFTEN TURNED INTO MAGMA
WHERE IT CAN BE
RE-RELEASED BACK TO
THE SURFACE THROUGH
VOLCANIC ACTIVITY.
ALMOST ALL THE CRUST
IS SOMEHOW IN SOME WAY
RECYCLED IN THESE PLATE
TECTONIC PROCESSES.
AND THE WAY THAT HAPPENS
IS THAT, EVEN THOUGH WE
HAVE A LOT OF OCEAN CRUST
BEING FORMED, THERE'S ALSO
A LOT OF SUBDUCTION
OF CRUST GOING ON.
SO IN THE OCEAN WE HAVE
THESE RIDGES THAT GO APART,
WE ALSO HAVE PLACES
WHERE ONE PLATE IS
SUBDUCTING UNDERNEATH
THE OTHER AND ESSENTIALLY
RETURNING BACK
TO THE EARTH.
IN TRANSFORM BOUNDARIES
CRUSIS NEITHER PRODUCED
NOR DESTROYED AND
THE PLATES JUST SLIDE
HORIZONTALLY
PAST ONE ANOTHER.
MANY OF THE MOST
DEVASTATING GEOLOGICAL
EVENTS HAPPEN AT
PLATE BOUNDARIES.
SO, FOR EXAMPLE,
EARTHQUAKES.
WE FIND EARTHQUAKES
ASSOCIATED WITH
ALL THREE TYPES
OF PLATE BOUNDARIES.
WE CAN HAVE PLATES THAT
PULL AWAY FROM EACH OTHER;
WE CAN HAVE PLATES
THAT SLAM TOGETHER;
AND WE CAN HAVE PLATES THAT
SLIDE PAST ONE ANOTHER.
ALL OF THOSE TYPES OF
PLATE BOUNDARIES ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH
EARTHQUAKES AND MOST OF
THE EARTHQUAKES ON OUR
PLANET ARE LOCALIZED
ALONG THE PLATE
BOUNDARIES.
THERE ARE A FEW ODDBALLS,
BUT MOST OF THEM
ARE ON THE PLATE
BOUNDARIES.
IN MANY OF THESE
BOUNDARIES THERE IS
A LOT OF TENSION AND STRAIN
WHERE THE TWO PLATES
ARE SLIDING AND SCRAPING
PAST EACH OTHER.
THE RESULTING STRAIN FROM
THE SLIDING ACTION OF THE
PLATES CAUSES CRACKS IN
THE CRUST CALLED "FAULTS".
AND FAULTS CAN BE VERY,
VERY SMALL OR THEY CAN BE
VERY LARGE LIKE THE SAN
ANDREAS FAULT IN CALIFORNIA.
SOME FAULTS ARE VISIBLE ON
THE SURFACE OF THE EARTH
BUT MANY FAULTS ARE NOT.
MANY FAULTS ARE HIDDEN
BENEATH THE SURFACE
OF THE EARTH.
REGARDLESS, WHEN FAULTS
MOVE, IF THEY'RE BIG ENOUGH,
WHEN THOSE ROCKS FINALLY
SEPARATE AND MOVE,
THEY CAN RELEASE AN
ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF
ELASTIC ENERGY - OF WHAT'S
CALLED "ELASTIC REBOUND"
AND THAT SHOCKWAVE
PRODUCED BY THOSE ROCKS
FINALLY SLIPPING AND
MOVING IS WHAT PRODUCES
AN EARTHQUAKE.
IT'S A VERY
CATASTROPHIC EVENT.
YOU RELEASE THAT ENERGY
ALL AT ONCE AND THE ENERGY
RADIATES THROUGHOUT
THE ENTIRE PLANET.
BUT OBVIOUSLY IT HAS THE
MOST DEVASTATING EFFECTS
WHEN YOU'RE CLOSE TO WHAT'S
CALLED THE EPICENTER
- THE LOCATION WHERE
THAT ENERGY IS RELEASED.
THE AREA WITHIN THE EARTH
WHERE THE EARTHQUAKE
ACTUALLY OCCURS, USUALLY
ALONG A FAULT THAT'S
SLIPPED WITHIN THE EARTH,
IS CALLED THE "FOCUS".
THE FIRST PLACE THOSE
ENERGY WAVES REACH THE
SURFACE OF THE EARTH, THE
FIRST PLACE THEY EMERGE
IS CALLED THE "EPICENTER".
SEISMIC VIBRATIONS, OR
WAVES, PRODUCED WHEN
THE GROUND
SUDDENLY RUPTURES
RADIATE OUT THROUGH
THE EARTH'S INTERIOR.
THERE ARE MANY TYPES
OF EARTHQUAKE WAVES,
BUT THE TWO MAIN ONES ARE:
"P" WAVES OR PRIMARY WAVES
TRAVEL SOMEWHAT FASTER -
ABOUT SIX KILOMETERS PER
SECOND - AND THEY CAUSE
WHAT'S CALLED A
COMPRESSIONAL WAVE.
SOUND WAVES ARE
COMPRESSIONAL WAVES.
AS MY VOCAL CHORDS VIBRATE
THEY'RE COMPRESSING
THE AIR AROUND THEM
CREATING SOUND.
WHEN AN EARTHQUAKE OCCURS,
A SEISMOGRAPH STATION
WHICH IS AN INSTRUMENT
THAT RECORDS THE
EARTHQUAKE WAVES, THE
FIRST WAVE THAT WILL BE
RECORDED IS THE FASTEST
WAVE OR THE P-WAVE.
THAT'S OFTEN WHY IT'S
CALLED A PRIMARY WAVE.
THE SECOND WAVE
THAT WILL REACH
THE SEISMOGRAPH
STATION IS THE S-WAVE.
S-WAVES, OR SHEAR WAVES,
MOVE RELATIVELY SLOW
- ABOUT FOUR
KILOMETERS PER SECOND -
AND THEY CAUSE A SHEARING
MOTION WITHIN THE ROCKS.
AND WHAT'S HANDY ABOUT
THAT IS THAT THE LAG TIME,
THAT IS THE TIME
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE
ARRIVAL OF THE "P" AND
THE ARRIVAL OF THE "S",
CAN BE USED TO CALCULATE
HOW FAR THE EARTHQUAKE
OCCURRED AWAY FROM THAT
SEISMOGRAPH STATION.
IF YOU HAVE THREE
SEISMOGRAPH STATIONS
AND YOU KNOW THE ARRIVAL
TIMES OF YOUR "S" AND "P"
AT EACH OF THOSE STATIONS,
YOU CAN GO AHEAD AND
TRIANGULATE THE POSITION
OR THE EPICENTER
OF THE EARTHQUAKE.
WE ASSOCIATE EARTHQUAKES
WITH DAMAGE CAUSED BY
TREMENDOUS GROUND-SHAKING.
HOWEVER, IN THE CASE OF
UNDERWATER EARTHQUAKES,
GIANT WAVES CALLED
"TSUNAMIS" CAN OCCUR.
A TSUNAMI IS GENERATED WHEN
YOU HAVE AN EARTHQUAKE
ALONG A PLATE BOUNDARY
THAT IS UNDER WATER.
SO IN THE CASE OF THE BIG
TSUNAMI GENERATED BY THE
SUMATRAN EARTHQUAKE,
WHAT HAPPENED WAS
THAT WAS ASSOCIATED WITH A
CONVERGENT PLATE BOUNDARY
WHERE ONE PLATE WAS
GRINDING DOWN UNDERNEATH
ANOTHER ONE AND WHEN
THAT EARTHQUAKE OCCURRED
THE UPPERMOST PLATE
MOVED VERY QUICKLY UP
AND SO ALL OF A SUDDEN
YOU'RE PUSHING ROCK
UP INTO AN AREA THAT
WAS OCCUPIED BY WATER
AND YOU CREATE
A GIANT WAVE.
AND, SO, AS YOU MOVE ALL
THAT VOLUME OF WATER
IT'S LIKE
SLAPPING YOUR HAND
AGAINST THE SIDE
OF A BATHTUB.
THE WATER HAS
TO GO SOMEWHERE
AND IT GENERATES WAVES
THAT SLOSH BACK AND FORTH
ACROSS THE OCEAN BASIN.
AS WITH EARTHQUAKES,
VOLCANIC ACTIVITY OR
VOLCANISM IS LINKED TO
PLATE TECTONIC PROCESSES
AND PLATE BOUNDARIES, IN
THIS CASE A VENT IN THE
CRUST FROM WHICH USUALLY
MOLTEN OR HOT ROCK
AND STEAM ERUPTS THROUGH
THE SURFACE OF THE PLANET.
THERE ARE LITERALLY
THOUSANDS OF VOLCANOES
OF A SORT THAT WE DON'T
PAY MUCH ATTENTION TO
BECAUSE THEY'RE
IN THE DEEP OCEANS
AND THEY FORM ALONG THE
DIVERGENT PLATE BOUNDARIES
OF THE SEA FLOOR
AND ARE SPREADING.
AND THEY'RE LESS
IMPORTANT TO US.
THEY'RE IMPORTANT
TO GEOLOGISTS FOR
UNDERSTANDING CERTAIN
PROCESSES, BUT THEY'RE
LESS IMPORTANT FOR US
BECAUSE THEY DON'T OCCUR
SO MUCH ON THE LAND.
MOST OF THE WORLD'S
ACTIVE ON-LAND VOLCANOES
ARE LOCATED NEAR
CONVERGENT PLATE BOUNDARIES
WHERE SUBDUCTION
IS OCCURRING.
A LOT OF DIFFERENT
FLAVORS OF VOLCANOES.
THE TWO PROBABLY MOST
PROMINENT TYPES OF VOLCANO
ARE STRATA VOLCANOES
WHICH DO DEVELOP
ALONG CONVERGENT
PLATE MARGINS -
EITHER OCEANIC-OCEANIC
CONVERGENT PLATE MARGINS
OR OCEANIC-CONTINENTAL
CONVERGENT PLATE MARGINS.
THESE ARE THE MOST VIOLENT
AND MOST EXPLOSIVE TYPE
OF VOLCANOES ON THE
PLANET AND THEY FORM
THE CLASSICAL CONE
SHAPE THAT YOU SEE.
MOUNT ST. HELENS
WAS AN EXAMPLE
OF A VERY EXPLOSIVE
STRATA VOLCANO.
AN IMPORTANT CLUE TO
UNDERSTANDING VOLCANOES
IS KNOWING THE LOCATION
OF THE VOLCANIC BANDS.
MANY OF THE WORLD'S ACTIVE
VOLCANOES ARE LOCATED
AROUND THE EDGES OF
THE PACIFIC OCEAN,
THE SO-CALLED
"RING OF FIRE".
SO, WE TALK ABOUT THE
PACIFIC RING OF FIRE.
SO, THE VOLCANOES THAT GO
UP ALONG THE CASCADES IN
THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST OF
THE UNITED STATES AND OUT
AROUND THE ALEUTIANS AND ALL
THE WAY DOWN THROUGH ASIA.
ALL OF THESE ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH THESE
VERY WATER-RICH MELTS AT
CONVERGENT PLATE BOUNDARIES
AND THEY
PRODUCE ABSOLUTELY
DEVASTATING
VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS.
THE SECOND MAJOR TYPE
OF VOLCANO IS CALLED
A "SHIELD" VOLCANO BECAUSE
IT HAS A BROAD SHIELD SHAPE
AND IT'S MADE OF MANY FLUID
FLOWS OF BASALTIC LAVA.
THEY'RE INTERESTING
BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT
ASSOCIATED WITH
PLATE BOUNDARIES.
THEY ARE THOUGHT TO
FORM ABOVE AREAS CALLED
"HOT SPOTS" THAT ARE
NOT VERY WELL UNDERSTOOD
BUT SEEM TO BE SOME
THERMAL ANOMALY THAT'S
PROPAGATING FROM WAY DOWN
NEAR THE CORE OF THE EARTH
AND RISING UP THROUGH THE
MANTLE AND CAUSING HEATING
AND UPWELLING THAT
ALSO PRODUCES MELT.
AND IN THIS SETTING, THE
MELTS THAT YOU GET HAVE
A LOW VISCOSITY, THEY TEND
TO HAVE A LOW SILICA CONTENT
AND THE AMOUNT OF
SILICON IN A MELT CONTROLS
HOW STICKY THAT MELT IS
WHICH AFFECTS HOW IT ERUPTS.
AND THEY HAVE NOT
MUCH WATER IN THEM.
IF YOU GO TO HAWAII AND
YOU WATCH THE VOLCANOES
ERUPTING THERE IT'S QUITE
SPECTACULAR TO LOOK AT
BUT THEY GENERALLY DON'T
CAUSE DEVASTATING DAMAGE.
IT IS IMPORTANT
TO UNDERSTAND THE
GEOLOGICAL PROCESSES
OF PLATE TECTONICS
BECAUSE THEY HELP
EXPLAIN OUR EARTH,
FROM THE GRAND MOUNTAINS
TO THE FIERY VOLCANOES.
THERE ARE SO MANY ASPECTS
OF GEOLOGY AS A SCIENCE
THAT ARE IMPORTANT
ON HUMAN TIME SCALES.
EVERY TIME THERE'S A LARGE
EARTHQUAKE IT AFFECTS
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
TO MILLIONS OF PEOPLE.
WE NEED TO KNOW WHERE
EARTHQUAKES ARE LIKELY
TO OCCUR AND WHEN
THEY'RE LIKELY TO OCCUR.
AND IF YOU LOOK AROUND
THE WORLD TODAY,
THERE ARE MANY
VERY LARGE CITIES
THAT ARE SITTING RIGHT
ON PLATE BOUNDARIES.
SO, FOR EXAMPLE, SAN
FRANCISCO, LOS ANGELES,
TOKYO, ANKARA - ALL SORTS
OF PLACES AROUND THE WORLD
WHERE THERE IS THE
POTENTIAL FOR ABSOLUTELY
DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKES
AND WE KNOW THAT
EARTHQUAKES HAVE OCCURRED
IN THE PAST IN ALL OF
THESE LOCATIONS AND BY
UNDERSTANDING HOW THE
PLATES ARE ACTUALLY MOVING
AND INTERACTING WITH
EACH OTHER, THE HOPE IS
THAT ULTIMATELY WE'LL HAVE
A BETTER WAY OF
FORECASTING EARTHQUAKES.
RIGHT NOW WE CAN SAY WHERE
EARTHQUAKES ARE LIKELY
TO OCCUR, BUT WE'RE NOT
VERY GOOD AT SAYING
NEXT TUESDAY THERE'S GOING
TO BE A MAGNITUDE EIGHT.
BECAUSE EARTH'S
INTERNAL HEAT ENGINE
IS ALIVE AND WELL
AND CHURNING AWAY,
THE THING THAT REALLY
DRIVES PLATE TECTONICS,
THE CONTINENTS
AREN'T DONE.
THEY'RE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO MOVE ABOUT
AND THE FACE OF OUR GLOBE
WILL CONTINUE TO CHANGE.
MOUNTAINS WILL BE
MADE AND ERODED AWAY.
OCEAN BASINS WILL
OPEN AND CLOSE.
THIS PROCESS IS GOING TO
REPEAT OVER AND OVER AGAIN.
AND AS WE STRIVE TO LEARN
MORE ABOUT THE PLATES
AND THE MYSTERIES OF
HOW OUR EARTH WORKS,
OUR OBSERVATIONS LEAD US
TO A BETTER UNDERSTANDING
AND A GREATER APPRECIATION
OF THE DYNAMIC PLANET EARTH.
*